README.md, before:

# Quake3e

[![build](../../workflows/build/badge.svg)](../../actions?query=workflow%3Abuild) * <a href="https://discord.com/invite/X3Exs4C"><img src="https://img.shields.io/discord/314456230649135105?color=7289da&logo=discord&logoColor=white" alt="Discord server" /></a>

This is a modern Quake III Arena engine aimed to be fast, secure and compatible with all existing Q3A mods.
It is based on last non-SDL source dump of [ioquake3](https://github.com/ioquake/ioq3) with latest upstream fixes applied.

Go to [Releases](../../releases) section to download latest binaries for your platform or follow [Build Instructions](#build-instructions)

*This repository does not contain any game content so in order to play you must copy the resulting binaries into your existing Quake III Arena installation*

**Key features**:

* optimized OpenGL renderer
* optimized Vulkan renderer
* raw mouse input support, enabled automatically instead of DirectInput(**\in_mouse 1**) if available
* unlagged mouse events processing, can be reverted by setting **\in_lagged 1**
* **\in_minimize** - hotkey for minimize/restore main window (win32-only, direct replacement for Q3Minimizer)
* **\video-pipe** - to use external ffmpeg binary as an encoder for better quality and smaller output files
* significally reworked QVM (Quake Virtual Machine)
* improved server-side DoS protection, much reduced memory usage
* raised filesystem limits (up to 20,000 maps can be handled in a single directory)
* reworked Zone memory allocator, no more out-of-memory errors
* non-intrusive support for SDL2 backend (video, audio, input), selectable at compile time
* tons of bug fixes and other improvements

## Vulkan renderer

Based on [Quake-III-Arena-Kenny-Edition](https://github.com/kennyalive/Quake-III-Arena-Kenny-Edition) with many additions:

* high-quality per-pixel dynamic lighting
* very fast flares (**\r_flares 1**)
* anisotropic filtering (**\r_ext_texture_filter_anisotropic**)
* greatly reduced API overhead (call/dispatch ratio)
* flexible vertex buffer memory management to allow loading huge maps
* multiple command buffers to reduce processing bottlenecks
* [reversed depth buffer](https://developer.nvidia.com/content/depth-precision-visualized) to eliminate z-fighting on big maps
* merged lightmaps (atlases)
* multitexturing optimizations
* static world surfaces cached in VBO (**\r_vbo 1**)
* useful debug markers for tools like [RenderDoc](https://renderdoc.org/)
* fixed framebuffer corruption on some Intel iGPUs
* offscreen rendering, enabled with **\r_fbo 1**, all following requires it enabled:
* `screenMap` texture rendering - to create realistic environment reflections
* multisample anti-aliasing (**\r_ext_multisample**)
* supersample anti-aliasing (**\r_ext_supersample**)
* per-window gamma-correction which is important for screen-capture tools like OBS
* you can minimize game window any time during **\video**|**\video-pipe** recording
* high dynamic range render targets (**\r_hdr 1**) to avoid color banding
* bloom post-processing effect
* arbitrary resolution rendering
* greyscale mode

In general, not counting offscreen rendering features you might expect from 10% to 200%+ FPS increase comparing to KE's original version

Highly recommended to use on modern systems

## OpenGL renderer

Based on classic OpenGL renderers from [idq3](https://github.com/id-Software/Quake-III-Arena)/[ioquake3](https://github.com/ioquake/ioq3)/[cnq3](https://bitbucket.org/CPMADevs/cnq3)/[openarena](https://github.com/OpenArena/engine), features:

* OpenGL 1.1 compatible, uses features from newer versions whenever available
* high-quality per-pixel dynamic lighting, can be triggered by **\r_dlightMode** cvar
* merged lightmaps (atlases)
* static world surfaces cached in VBO (**\r_vbo 1**)
* all set of offscreen rendering features mentioned in Vulkan renderer, plus:
* bloom reflection post-processing effect

Performance is usually greater or equal to other opengl1 renderers

## OpenGL2 renderer

Original ioquake3 renderer, performance is very poor on non-nvidia systems, unmaintained

## [Build Instructions](BUILD.md)

## Contacts

Discord channel: https://discordapp.com/invite/X3Exs4C

## Links

* https://bitbucket.org/CPMADevs/cnq3
* https://github.com/ioquake/ioq3
* https://github.com/kennyalive/Quake-III-Arena-Kenny-Edition
* https://github.com/OpenArena/engine

Commit message:

SSR: Add initial server-side recording system

README.md, after:

# Quake3e

[![build](../../workflows/build/badge.svg)](../../actions?query=workflow%3Abuild) * <a href="https://discord.com/invite/X3Exs4C"><img src="https://img.shields.io/discord/314456230649135105?color=7289da&logo=discord&logoColor=white" alt="Discord server" /></a>

This is a modern Quake III Arena engine aimed to be fast, secure and compatible with all existing Q3A mods.
It is based on last non-SDL source dump of [ioquake3](https://github.com/ioquake/ioq3) with latest upstream fixes applied.

Go to [Releases](../../releases) section to download latest binaries for your platform or follow [Build Instructions](#build-instructions)

*This repository does not contain any game content so in order to play you must copy the resulting binaries into your existing Quake III Arena installation*

**Key features**:

* optimized OpenGL renderer
* optimized Vulkan renderer
* raw mouse input support, enabled automatically instead of DirectInput(**\in_mouse 1**) if available
* unlagged mouse events processing, can be reverted by setting **\in_lagged 1**
* **\in_minimize** - hotkey for minimize/restore main window (win32-only, direct replacement for Q3Minimizer)
* **\video-pipe** - to use external ffmpeg binary as an encoder for better quality and smaller output files
* significally reworked QVM (Quake Virtual Machine)
* improved server-side DoS protection, much reduced memory usage
* raised filesystem limits (up to 20,000 maps can be handled in a single directory)
* reworked Zone memory allocator, no more out-of-memory errors
* non-intrusive support for SDL2 backend (video, audio, input), selectable at compile time
* tons of bug fixes and other improvements

## Vulkan renderer

Based on [Quake-III-Arena-Kenny-Edition](https://github.com/kennyalive/Quake-III-Arena-Kenny-Edition) with many additions:

* high-quality per-pixel dynamic lighting
* very fast flares (**\r_flares 1**)
* anisotropic filtering (**\r_ext_texture_filter_anisotropic**)
* greatly reduced API overhead (call/dispatch ratio)
* flexible vertex buffer memory management to allow loading huge maps
* multiple command buffers to reduce processing bottlenecks
* [reversed depth buffer](https://developer.nvidia.com/content/depth-precision-visualized) to eliminate z-fighting on big maps
* merged lightmaps (atlases)
* multitexturing optimizations
* static world surfaces cached in VBO (**\r_vbo 1**)
* useful debug markers for tools like [RenderDoc](https://renderdoc.org/)
* fixed framebuffer corruption on some Intel iGPUs
* offscreen rendering, enabled with **\r_fbo 1**, all following requires it enabled:
* `screenMap` texture rendering - to create realistic environment reflections
* multisample anti-aliasing (**\r_ext_multisample**)
* supersample anti-aliasing (**\r_ext_supersample**)
* per-window gamma-correction which is important for screen-capture tools like OBS
* you can minimize game window any time during **\video**|**\video-pipe** recording
* high dynamic range render targets (**\r_hdr 1**) to avoid color banding
* bloom post-processing effect
* arbitrary resolution rendering
* greyscale mode

In general, not counting offscreen rendering features you might expect from 10% to 200%+ FPS increase comparing to KE's original version

Highly recommended to use on modern systems

## OpenGL renderer

Based on classic OpenGL renderers from [idq3](https://github.com/id-Software/Quake-III-Arena)/[ioquake3](https://github.com/ioquake/ioq3)/[cnq3](https://bitbucket.org/CPMADevs/cnq3)/[openarena](https://github.com/OpenArena/engine), features:

* OpenGL 1.1 compatible, uses features from newer versions whenever available
* high-quality per-pixel dynamic lighting, can be triggered by **\r_dlightMode** cvar
* merged lightmaps (atlases)
* static world surfaces cached in VBO (**\r_vbo 1**)
* all set of offscreen rendering features mentioned in Vulkan renderer, plus:
* bloom reflection post-processing effect

Performance is usually greater or equal to other opengl1 renderers

## OpenGL2 renderer

Original ioquake3 renderer, performance is very poor on non-nvidia systems, unmaintained

## Server Side Recording

Enabled by `sv_recordAutoRecording 1` to record all matches on the server to records directory.

To convert recorded file to demo format for playback, use `record_convert <filename> <clientnum> <instance>` command, where filename is the path to the .rec file within the records directory, clientnum is the client perspective to view, and instance differentiates multiple clients or reconnections with the same client number.

To view available clients and instances for a record file, use `record_scan <filename>` command.

## Admin Spectator

Allows admins to spectate players on the server without joining (useful to monitor for cheating). To enable, set `sv_adminSpectatorPassword` on the server to a password of your choosing. To join the server in spectator mode, set password on the client to `spect_` plus the server password.

## [Build Instructions](BUILD.md)

## Contacts

Discord channel: https://discordapp.com/invite/X3Exs4C

## Links

* https://bitbucket.org/CPMADevs/cnq3
* https://github.com/ioquake/ioq3
* https://github.com/kennyalive/Quake-III-Arena-Kenny-Edition
* https://github.com/OpenArena/engine
